Causes
Alzheimer's disease is believed to occur when abnormal amounts of amyloid beta (Aβ), accumulating extracellularly as amyloid plaques and tau proteins, or intracellularly as neurofibrillary tangles, form in the brain, affecting neuronal functioning and connectivity, resulting in a progressive loss of brain function. This altered protein clearance ability is age-related, regulated by brain cholesterol, and associated with other neurodegenerative diseases.
The cause for most Alzheimer's cases is still mostly unknown, except for 1–2% of cases where deterministic genetic differences have been identified. Several competing hypotheses attempt to explain the underlying cause; the most predominant hypothesis is the amyloid beta (Aβ) hypothesis.

Genetic
Late onset
Late-onset Alzheimer's is about 70% heritable. Most cases of Alzheimer's are not familial, and so they are termed sporadic Alzheimer's disease. Of the cases of sporadic Alzheimer's disease, most are classified as late onset where they are developed after the age of 65 years.
The strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic Alzheimer's disease is APOEε4. APOEε4 is one of four alleles of apolipoprotein E (APOE). APOE plays a major role in lipid-binding proteins in lipoprotein particles and the ε4 allele disrupts this function. Between 40% and 80% of people with Alzheimer's disease possess at least one APOEε4 allele. The APOEε4 allele increases the risk of the disease by three times in heterozygotes and by 15 times in homozygotes. Like many human diseases, environmental effects and genetic modifiers result in incomplete penetrance. For example, Nigerian Yoruba people do not show the relationship between dose of APOEε4 and incidence or age-of-onset for Alzheimer's disease seen in other human populations.

Early onset
Further information: Early-onset Alzheimer's disease
Only 1–2% of Alzheimer's cases are inherited due to autosomal dominant mutations, as Alzheimer's disease is substantially polygenic. When the disease is caused by autosomal dominant variants, it is known as early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease, which is rarer and tends to progress more rapidly. Less than 5% of sporadic Alzheimer's disease have an earlier onset, and early-onset Alzheimer's is about 90% heritable. Familial Alzheimer's disease usually implies two or more persons affected in one or more generations.
Early onset familial Alzheimer's disease can be attributed to mutations in one of three genes: those encoding amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP) and presenilins PSEN1 and PSEN2. Most mutations in the APP and presenilin genes increase the production of a small protein called amyloid beta (Aβ)42, which is the main component of amyloid plaques. Some of the mutations merely alter the ratio between Aβ42 and the other major forms—particularly Aβ40—without increasing Aβ42 levels in the brain. Two other genes associated with autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease are ABCA7 and SORL1.
Alleles in the TREM2 gene have been associated with a three to five times higher risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
A Japanese pedigree of familial Alzheimer's disease was found to be associated with a deletion mutation of codon 693 of APP. This mutation and its association with Alzheimer's disease was first reported in 2008, and is known as the Osaka mutation. Only homozygotes with this mutation have an increased risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. This mutation accelerates Aβ oligomerization but the proteins do not form the amyloid fibrils that aggregate into amyloid plaques, suggesting that it is the Aβ oligomerization rather than the fibrils that may be the cause of this disease. Mice expressing this mutation have all the usual pathologies of Alzheimer's disease.

Hypotheses
Misfolded protein
Tau protein abnormalities in neurons may contribute to onset of Alzheimer's disease
Two abnormal proteins define the pathology of Alzheimer's disease: amyloid beta protein (Aβ) in amyloid plaques and tau protein in neurofibrillary tangles. These proteins share two features that promote their ability to cause disease: They both become abnormal by misfolding, that is, by assuming a shape that is rich in beta sheets; and they proliferate in the brain by the prion-like mechanism of seeded protein aggregation. The presence of these abnormal proteins in Alzheimer's disease has spawned two hypotheses of the proteopathic origin of the disease: The amyloid (or Aβ) hypothesis, and the tau hypothesis.
The amyloid hypothesis, also known as the "amyloid cascade hypothesis" or "Aβ cascade hypothesis", holds that the accumulation of misfolded Aβ in the brain is the fundamental cause of Alzheimer's disease. In the amyloid cascade, the buildup of abnormal Aβ leads to tauopathy and eventually the complex degenerative changes of advanced Alzheimer's disease. Abnormal Aβ is thought to damage the brain by directly interacting with cells, and/or indirectly, for example by causing oxidative stress and neuroinflammation.
The amyloid hypothesis is supported by evidence from genetics and biomarkers. All autosomal dominant genetic causes of Alzheimer's disease affect either the amyloid precursor protein (APP) on chromosome 21 or the enzymes that generate Aβ, known as presenilin 1 and presenilin 2. In addition, people with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), most of whom have an extra copy of the gene for APP, almost universally develop the symptoms and neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease by 40 years of age. Conversely, people with a rare mutation in the APP gene that reduces the production of Aβ and its tendency to aggregate are protected against Alzheimer's disease. Additionally, a major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease is a specific isoform of apolipoprotein E, APOE4. Of the three major isoforms (APOE2, APOE3 and APOE4), APOE4 is linked to the least efficient removal of Aβ by astrocytes, which promotes the buildup of Aβ in the brain. The most efficient clearance of Aβ is achieved by cells bearing the APOE2 isoform, which protects against Alzheimer's disease. Evidence from biomarkers such as imaging of protein deposits in the brain and measurement of brain-derived substances in cerebrospinal fluid and blood implicates abnormalities of Aβ as the earliest and most robust disease-specific change in Alzheimer's disease.

The tau hypothesis proposes that abnormalities of the tau protein initiate the disease cascade, at least in cases of idiopathic Alzheimer's disease. The tau hypothesis is supported by the histopathological findings of Heiko Braak and colleagues that tauopathy can be detected in certain neurons before Aβ plaques are evident. Specifically, Alzheimer's starts with the hyperphosphorylation of tau in specific vulnerable neuronal populations such as the locus coeruleus and projection neurons of the association cortex. There is agreement in the research community that tau contributes strongly to dementia in Alzheimer's disease, but tauopathy occurs in over 30 diseases besides Alzheimer's disease). In addition, mutations of the gene for tau (MAPT) cause neurodegenerative disorders known as primary tauopathies, but these diseases occur in the absence of Aβ proteopathy. Current evidence thus favors abnormal Aβ as the prime mover of Alzheimer's disease. However, the Aβ hypothesis and tau hypothesis are not mutually exclusive, in that abnormalities of Aβ initiate the disease and tauopathy is required for its complete expression.
Hormonal
Because women have a higher incidence of AD than men, it has been thought that estrogen deficiency during menopause is a risk factor. In a 2025 analysis of the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging earlier age at menopause was linked with lower cognitive performance.[90]
Infection
The possibility that infectious agents cause Alzheimer's disease has been considered since the early 20th century, when Oskar Fischer likened amyloid plaques to small masses (called 'Drusen') of a microbe called actinomyces. Since then, at least 15 different agents, including bacteria, viruses, fungi and protozoa, have been proposed to cause Alzheimer's disease. No definitive evidence has been presented that a specific infectious agent is necessary and sufficient to cause Alzheimer's disease. However, it is possible that microbial infections might act as risk factors for the disease. For example, human herpes viruses such as HSV-1, HHV-6 and HHV-7 have been linked to the risk of Alzheimer's disease. In addition, some pathogens have been reported to seed Aβ deposition in the brain, and aggregated Aβ has antimicrobial properties, suggesting that Aβ plaques might form when brain cells generate Aβ to fight infection. Researchers caution that brain infections can cause dementia by mechanisms unrelated to Alzheimer's disease.
DNA damage
DNA damage accumulates in affected brains; reactive oxygen species may be the major source of this DNA damage.
Cholinergic
The cholinergic hypothesis proposes that the loss of neurons in the basal forebrain, which produce the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, is a key event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. These cells supply acetylcholine to synapses in the limbic system and cerebral cortex. The cholinergic hypothesis led to the development of drugs that increase acetylcholine in the brains of Alzheimer patients. The efficacy of these agents is limited, probably because many other neurotransmitter systems degenerate in Alzheimer's disease.
Sleep
Sleep disturbances are seen as a possible risk factor for inflammation in Alzheimer's disease. Sleep disruption was previously only seen as a consequence of Alzheimer's disease, but as of 2020, accumulating evidence suggests that this relationship may be bidirectional.
Neuroinflammation, metal toxicity, smoking, and air pollution
Systemic markers of the innate immune system are risk factors for late-onset Alzheimer's disease, and misfolded Aβ and tau proteins both are associated with oxidative stress and neuroinflammation. Chronic inflammation also is a feature of other neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease, and ALS. The cellular homeostasis of biometals such as ionic copper, iron, and zinc is disrupted in Alzheimer's disease, though it remains unclear whether this is produced by or causes the changes in proteins. Smoking is a significant Alzheimer's disease risk factor. Exposure to air pollution may be a contributing factor to the development of Alzheimer's disease.
Age-related myelin decline
Retrogenesis is a medical hypothesis that just as the fetus goes through a process of neurodevelopment beginning with neurulation and ending with myelination, the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease go through a reverse neurodegeneration process starting with demyelination and death of axons (white matter) and ending with the death of grey matter. Likewise the hypothesis is, that as infants go through states of cognitive development, people with Alzheimer's disease go through the reverse process of progressive cognitive impairment.

According to one theory, dysfunction of oligodendrocytes and their associated myelin during aging contributes to axon damage, which in turn generates in amyloid production and tau hyperphosphorylation. Comorbidities between the demyelinating disease, multiple sclerosis, and Alzheimer's disease have been reported.

Other hypotheses

See also: Cell cycle hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease and Ion channel hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease
The association with celiac disease is unclear, with a 2019 study finding no increase in dementia overall in those with celiac disease while a 2018 review found an association with several types of dementia including Alzheimer's disease.

Studies have reported a potential link between infection with certain viruses and developing Alzheimer's disease later in life. Notably, a large scale study conducted on 6,245,282 patients has reported an increased risk of developing Alzheimer's disease following COVID-19 infection in cognitively normal individuals over 65.

Some evidence suggests that some viral infections such as Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) may be associated with dementia, but there are conflicting results and the association with Alzheimer's is unclear as of 2024.

Some researchers have proposed that Alzheimer's disease is Type 3 diabetes because of a number of correspondences with both Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes.

Pathophysiology
Neuropathology

Histopathologic images of Alzheimer's disease, in the CA3 area of the hippocampus, showing an amyloid plaque (top right), neurofibrillary tangles (bottom left), and granulovacuolar degeneration bodies (bottom center)
The gross (macroscopic) appearance of the brain in Alzheimer's disease is variable. In many cases the cortical sulci are widened and the gyri are shrunken, but the degree of cortical atrophy varies, and it can sometimes be difficult to discern, particularly in very old subjects. The areas most affected by atrophy are the medial temporal lobe including the hippocampal formation, the amygdala, the frontal lobe and the parietal lobe; the occipital lobe is relatively unaffected by atrophy. The volume of the ventricles increases in parallel with cortical shrinkage. Studies using MRI and PET have documented reductions in the size of specific brain regions in people with Alzheimer's disease as they progress from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease, and in comparison with similar images from healthy older adults. These macroscopic changes in the brain can occur in other disorders and to some extent in normal aging; thus, they are not specific to Alzheimer's disease, which can be diagnosed with certainty only by microscopic examination of the brain.
At the microscopic level, the defining histopathologic characteristics of Alzheimer's disease are abundant amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in certain brain regions. Both of these abnormalities are clearly visible by microscopy, and amyloid imaging. In the early stages of disease, tangles are present mainly in the medial temporal lobe and plaques are present mainly in the neocortex, but as the disease progresses the lesions proliferate throughout much of the brain. Although it was once thought that Alzheimer's disease can occur without neurofibrillary tangles in the neocortex, newer methods have shown that dementia in these cases can be linked to a comorbid condition, often Lewy body disease.
Aβ plaques are dense, mostly insoluble deposits of amyloid beta peptide and cellular material outside and around neurons. Neurofibrillary tangles are aggregates of the microtubule-associated protein tau which has become hyperphosphorylated and accumulates inside neurons. Although many older individuals develop some plaques and tangles as a consequence of aging, the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease have a greater number of them in specific brain regions.
The two defining proteopathies of Alzheimer's disease: Aβ plaques (brown) and neurofibrillary (tau) tangles (black). Abnormal, hyperphosphorylated tau occurs in neuronal cell bodies, in fine neuronal processes throughout the neuropil, and in swollen neurites within the plaques. Dual immunohistochemical stain using antibodies to Aβ and tau proteins. Scale bar = 50 microns (0.05 mm).
In addition to plaques and tangles, other neuropathological changes contribute to the clinicopathologic features of advanced Alzheimer's disease. These include cerebral Aβ-amyloid angiopathy (CAA), inflammation, and the loss of neurons and synapses. The disappearance of neurons and their synapses is a particularly prominent correlate of dementia, although not all cells are affected equally. Selective vulnerability - that is, why certain neurons and synapses are affected and others spared - is an important unanswered question.

In more than half of the cases examined neuropathologically, and especially in very old people, the pathology of Alzheimer's disease is accompanied by lesions that are characteristic of other brain disorders. The most common of these comorbid conditions are vascular disease, Lewy body disease, and TDP-43 proteinopathy. This mixed pathology can complicate both diagnosis and the evaluation of clinical trials, which often target only one of several potential contributors to dementia.

Biochemistry
Main article: Biochemistry of Alzheimer's disease
Amyloid beta (Aβ)
Alzheimer's disease has been identified as a protein misfolding disease, a proteopathy, caused by the accumulation of abnormally folded Aβ protein into amyloid plaques, and tau protein into neurofibrillary tangles in the brain. Plaques are made up of small peptides, 39–43 amino acids in length, called Aβ. Aβ is a fragment derived from the larger Aβ precursor protein (APP), a transmembrane protein that penetrates the cell's membrane. APP is critical to neuronal growth, survival, and post-injury repair. In Alzheimer's disease, the enzymes gamma secretase and beta secretase act together in a proteolytic process that divides APP into smaller fragments. One of these fragments is Aβ, which misfolds and self-assembles into fibrils; these fibrils form clumps that deposit outside neurons in dense formations known as Aβ plaques. Excitatory neurons are known to be major producers of Aβ that contribute to extracellular plaque deposition.




Enzymes act on the amyloid-beta precursor protein and cut it into fragments. The beta-amyloid fragment is crucial in the formation of amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease.
Phosphorylated tau
Alzheimer's disease is also considered a tauopathy due to the abnormal aggregation of the tau protein within cells. Every neuron has a cytoskeleton, an internal support structure partly made up of organelles called microtubules. These microtubules act like tracks, guiding nutrients and molecules from the body of the cell to the ends of the axon and back. The tau protein stabilises the microtubules when phosphorylated, and it is therefore called a microtubule-associated protein. In Alzheimer's disease, tau undergoes chemical changes, becoming hyperphosphorylated; it then begins to pair with other threads, creating neurofibrillary tangles and disintegrating the neuron's transport system. Pathogenic tau can also cause neuronal death through transposable element dysregulation. Necroptosis has also been reported as a mechanism of cell death in brain cells affected with tau tangles.

Disease mechanism
Exactly how disturbances of production and aggregation of the Aβ peptide give rise to the pathology of Alzheimer's disease is not known. The amyloid hypothesis (also known as the 'amyloid cascade hypothesis') posits that the accumulation of abnormally shaped Aβ peptides is the central event triggering the sequence of changes that eventually lead to neurodegeneration and dementia. Misfolded Aβ accumulates in the brain because it causes normal Aβ molecules to similarly misfold by a prion-like 'seeding' mechanism. The aggregated Aβ takes the form of small oligomers (which are particularly toxic to neurons) and amyloid fibrils, the long polymers that are the main components of Aβ plaques. Some researchers have argued that the amyloid fibrils bind up smaller oligomers and thus protect brain cells from the injurious effects of the oligomers. However, the plaques are not benign inasmuch as they are associated with abnormal neuronal processes and local inflammation. Whatever the relative influence of Aβ oligomers and fibrils, the presence of aggregated Aβ is associated with the disruption of neuronal metabolism and various other changes such as inflammation. Aβ also selectively builds up in mitochondria in the cells of Alzheimer's-affected brains, and it inhibits certain enzyme functions and the utilisation of glucose by neurons.

Evidence supports Aβ as playing a central role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, but as the disease progresses the brain undergoes a complex assortment of cellular and molecular changes, including (in addition to tauopathy) inflammation, oxidative/nitrative stress, DNA damage, epigenetic changes, excitotoxicity, endosomal/lysosomal failure, dysproteostasis, autophagy failure, lipid dysmetabolism, calcium ion (Ca2+) dyshomeostasis, post-translational protein modifications, neuronal cell cycle re-entry, mitochondrial failure, cytoskeletal disruption, glucose dysmetabolism, vascular or lymphatic impairments, and biometal dyshomeostasis. Iron dyshomeostasis is linked to disease progression in which an iron-dependent form of regulated cell death called ferroptosis could be involved. Products of lipid peroxidation are also elevated in the Alzheimer brain compared with controls.

Various inflammatory processes and cytokines also play a role in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease. Inflammation is a general marker of tissue damage in any disease, and may be either secondary to tissue damage in Alzheimer's disease or a marker of an immunological response. Cells that mediate neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's include microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, lymphocytes and myeloid cells. There is increasing evidence of a strong interaction between neurons and the immunological mechanisms in the brain. Obesity and systemic inflammation may interfere with immunological processes which promote disease progression. Microglia are especially important actors in the Alzheimer's-related inflammation. Microglia are the principal immunological cells of the central nervous system, serving as the tissue-resident macrophages of the brain; they are capable of recognizing and taking up Aβ through multiple pattern recognition receptors, making them central to amyloid clearance within the brain. However, microglia can also be a major source of pro-inflammatory mediators which can be deleterious to neurological function. Microglia are topographically associated with aberrant deposits of tau and Aβ within the brain, even when each pathologic component occurs in distinct brain regions. Microglial activation has been documented in people with mild cognitive impairment, despite a lack of detectable binding of a PET tracer for Aβ in the brain, suggesting that microglial dysfunction may precede plaque deposition as an inciting event in AD.

Alterations in the distribution of different neurotrophic factors and in the expression of their receptors, such as the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), have been described in Alzheimer's disease.

By the time the symptoms of Alzheimer's first appear, the complex degenerative mechanisms in the brain have been active for many years. Hence, the beneficial effect of therapeutics (specifically, the monoclonal antibodies that promote Aβ clearance) has ranged from nonexistent to modest. Second-generation antibodies to Aβ have resulted in significant slowing of the progression of Alzheimer's disease, but these have not yet stopped or reversed dementia. Hence, researchers increasingly believe that the best strategy is to prevent Alzheimer's by intervening before the brain has been irreversibly damaged.
